docsrc/index.md, before:

% Testo documentation

Testo is a test framework suitable for unit-testing OCaml code
and for end-to-end testing command-line executables. It is an open-source
project initiated by [Martin Jambon](https://www.linkedin.com/in/mjambon/)
at [Semgrep](https://semgrep.dev/).

* [Getting Started with Testo: A Hands-On Tutorial](tutorial)
* [Testo Howtos: Practical Guides and Examples](howtos)
* [API reference](reference/testo/Testo/index.html)
* Command-line help:
  - [`--help`](cli-reference/help.html)
  - [`run --help`](cli-reference/run-help.html)
  - [`status --help`](cli-reference/status-help.html)
  - [`approve --help`](cli-reference/approve-help.html)
  - [`show-tags --help`](cli-reference/show-tags-help.html)
* [Contributing: source code and issue tracking on GitHub](https://github.com/semgrep/testo)

<div style="margin-top:5em">
  <img src="img/success.png" width="60%"
       alt="screenshot showing the tail of a successful test run"
       title="a successful test run"/>
</div>

_A successful test run_

<div style="margin-top:5em">
  <img src="img/status.png" width="60%"
       alt="screenshot showing the output of './test status'"
       title="the output of './test status -a'"/>
</div>

_The output of `./test status -a`_

<div style="margin-top:5em">
  <img src="img/wendys.png" width="60%"
       alt="screenshot showing a test failure"
       title="a test failure"/>
</div>

_A test failure showing a CRLF issue_

Commit message:

Add "quick start" section to website and to readme

docsrc/index.md, after:

% Testo(caml)

Testo is an industry-grade test framework for OCaml.
It is suitable for unit-testing OCaml code
and for end-to-end testing command-line executables.
[This community project](https://github.com/semgrep/testo)
was started by [Martin Jambon](https://www.linkedin.com/in/mjambon/)
at [Semgrep](https://semgrep.dev/).

Quick Start
--

```
$ opam update
$ opam install testo
$ git clone https://github.com/semgrep/testo-template.git
$ cd testo-template
$ dune build
$ ./test
```

Copy and adapt as needed.

Documentation
--

* [Getting Started with Testo: A Hands-On Tutorial](tutorial)
* [Testo Howtos: Practical Guides and Examples](howtos)
* [API reference](reference/testo/Testo/index.html)
* Command-line help:
  - [`--help`](cli-reference/help.html)
  - [`run --help`](cli-reference/run-help.html)
  - [`status --help`](cli-reference/status-help.html)
  - [`approve --help`](cli-reference/approve-help.html)
  - [`show-tags --help`](cli-reference/show-tags-help.html)
* [Contributing: source code and issue tracking on GitHub](https://github.com/semgrep/testo)

<div style="margin-top:5em">
  <img src="img/success.png" width="60%"
       alt="screenshot showing the tail of a successful test run"
       title="a successful test run"/>
</div>

_A successful test run_

<div style="margin-top:5em">
  <img src="img/status.png" width="60%"
       alt="screenshot showing the output of './test status'"
       title="the output of './test status -a'"/>
</div>

_The output of `./test status -a`_

<div style="margin-top:5em">
  <img src="img/wendys.png" width="60%"
       alt="screenshot showing a test failure"
       title="a test failure"/>
</div>

_A test failure showing a CRLF issue_
